So let's understand em and for now,
em and rem are units which are calculated based on the font size.
Now what does this mean?
Well back on our customers page, we already learned that if we go to our settings right here, that the
user can change the font size, for example to very large, like that. If we go back to our page, we saw that
the nav bar font size increases but the text right here stays the same.
This is simply due to the fact that our testimonial class, this one right here, has a font size applied,
a font size property by us of 20 pixels.
This means, let me change it back again to the
recommended one, the default value, the default font size that the nav bar gets smaller again
but right here, our class doesn't change because we have this font size applied.
That's the first issue we have actually because I said that already in one of the earlier lectures, if our user,
our website visitor wants to increase the font size, well we should allow him to do this,
therefore definitely something we have to improve.
However, let's dive a bit deeper into this class now
because inside this class we have the image container but that's not really a font size topic right now
but this testimonial info class right here, this one, this one also has a font size probably, as we
can see it inherits the font size from the testimonial class,
so basically the font size also is 20 pixels right here.
We talked about inheritance in general,
so this is probably clear.
However if I look at the different elements inside our class here, these are not equally sized to be honest
because if we select this h1 element right here, we can see that the inheritance didn't work,
we can see it right there,
it was overridden but there was a font size of 2em applied.
This was applied by the browser because it's an h1 element, a special element and therefore the Chrome
browser added this 2em font size to it.
Now what is 2em in pixels now?
Let's go to the computed tab,
here we can untick that show all tab and if we then go down, we can see something really interesting here
because the font size applied for this h1 element is 40 pixels and this is, sorry for that,
and this is based on the 20 pixels initially that we define from the testimonial class
but this is stroke through here because the 2em is applied. Now
but if I take 20 pixels times 2, then I got 40 pixels,
so there seems to be some kind of calculation related to these em units.
So let's keep that in mind and let's have a look at another element,
the h2 elements right here because there in general, it would be the same behavior.
We also have this 1.5em but we also define a font size of 18 pixels,
therefore this is the value that is applied
but if I unselect this value now, then you can see that 1.5em gets active
and if we again go to computed right here, you can see that now we have 30 pixels
and interestingly, it's again 20 pixels times 1.5,
well this results in 30.
So again, we see that em is calculated based on the actual size of our element which is inherited from
the parent and then multiplied by this factor right here,
so we are diving deeper and deeper into em now. Let's have a look at the paragraph, at the last
element inside our testimonial info class right here.
This paragraph doesn't have any font sizing applied,
it simply inherits the font size of 20 pixels of our testimonial class.
So we have a nice mixture of a fixed font size for our container here, for our testimonial class,
then we have testimonial info is which also inherits 20 pixels
and then we have these em values for h1 and h2
and we have p where we define a font size, for h2
we also define the font size,
sorry for that.
So how can we now make this font size a bit more dynamic?
Because let me first reload the page.
We still have the problem that if we changed the font size right here as we did before, we don't have
any impact though on to our text right here
and this should definitely change.
Now for that, we have different ways to approach this issue.
The easiest one would be to simply say ok, why don't we just change the font size right here,
this 20 pixels, to this em we just saw
because em apparently multiplies a value and by that, seems to be more dynamic.
So let's do that by going to the customers.css file
and now change the font size of 20 pixels to let's say 1.2em because we saw that 1em is apparently equal
to 16 pixels, so 1.2 seems to be a nice approximation. Let's do that, like this and reload the page. As you
can see, it's slightly smaller but if I inspect that class right now and so the testimonial class and go to
computed, we can see that we have a font size of a 19.2 pixels,
this is basically 16 pixels times 1.2
and as the 16 pixels is actually specified by our browser settings, right here
and if we go to very large with that, we can see that the font size also increases because now we have
28.8 pixels which is 24 pixels times 1.2.
Now with that, things got a bit more dynamic, let's change it back to the initial value though,
like that. The problem still is that we don't have the entire control of all our elements,
the h1 element for example still has the font size applied by the browser.
So let's also change that by going to the testimonial name class which we have right here and now apply
such a font size of 2em right here.
If we do that and reload the page, nothing changes but now we are the ones who define that 2em should
be applied,
so it's not depending on the browser anymore but we are the ones who specify this code. For the h2
class, we have this font size of 18 pixels and that's not what we want right because we want to
make things dynamic,
this means if we keep it the way it is right now and we increase the font size to large again in the
browser, we can see that the founder of techanalysis.com text remains at 18 pixels, so not
the best thing to do,
so let's also change that to medium like that and work on the testimonial subtitle class,
this is the class right here
and let's change this font size to 1.1em maybe because we saw 1em if we have the default browser
size of 16 pixels is close to 18 pixels.
If we reload that, we see it's slightly bigger,
let's see why.
Now what's that issue?
This is strange right because I actually said that it's 1.1em, so the normal size times 1.1 but now it's
too big.
Well that's basically the problem of em, as we can see right here
em inherits the previous sizes and by that multiplies the em with the previous em.
Now what do I mean by that?
We have the 16 pixels defined in the browser,
in our testimonial class, we specified 1.2em,
this means we already have a font size of 19.2 pixels.
Now this value then also gets inherited by our testimonial-subtitle class
and then again multiplied by 1.1 which leads to our 21.12 pixels, the 1.5 right here are not taken
into account because as we can see, h2 and h1 are neighbors,
so the inheritance takes place between h1 and this div with the class, testimonial info
and because of that, you can quickly get into trouble by having lots and lots of ems and all that inheritance
and multiplications
and to make it short, this can quickly become a mess.
This doesn't mean that you shouldn't use em at all,
it can be helpful if you have a specific use case but you want to define the font size of specific parts
of your website with these em units,
so I don't want to tell you never use em,
I just want to tell you be careful right here because there is another approach which helps us to avoid
exactly these issues
and this is the rem units because if we now simply go back to our code and change 1.1em to 1.1rem and reload
the page, then you can see that the font size right here of our h2 class looks a lot better
and the reason for that is simply that now we have a font size of 17.6 pixels.
Why is this happening?
Well because the only calculation that is done right now is the code is told to do the following,
just take the font size that is set by the browser settings,
so 16 pixels in our case and multiply it with 1.1 because rem, the r in rem stands for root.
So we always go back to the root element of our website which is the HTML element and with that, the browser
default which defines the size for that root element,
in all cases where you don't change this default behavior, I showed you how this works
and as the font size always depends on this browser settings, the user has the full control of the
size he wants to have on his website
and we can simply specify all our sizes, our font sizes for example based on this rem value.
This means we can also go back now and change the 2em for the testimonial name to 2rem,
this means two times the size of the element,
so 16 pixels in our case and also change it right here for the font size of the testimonial class to
1.2rem.
If we now reload, we can see the page looks basically the same way it did before
and if we now change our font size right here, like that, you can see that all elements inside our testimonial
class
now change the font size depending on the settings of the user.
And that's actually the cool thing about rem,
you can easily specify the font size or also other sizes of course,
it's not restricted to fonts only,
the important thing to keep in mind though is that rem and em always refer to the font size,
that's the basic size value that they take into account
but you can also use rem for margins for example,
we'll see how this works.
But with that rem approach, you really got a powerful tool to make your fonts more flexible and make
it easier for the user to display the website the way he prefers it to be displayed.
There used to be one downside of rem though, as rem is a rather new approach,
the browser support wasn't the best but if we go to caniuse.com again, right here and now enter rem,
well you can see that browser support in the more recent versions of all modern browsers is pretty decent,
therefore rem is a really nice unit to use if you want to change your font size and also other properties,
I'll dive into that in the next lectures
and with that, we could actually use that new knowledge we gained now and apply it to our customers page
because we have more than these few font sizes
we changed up here now.